docs: add qgb module readme (#1052)
celestiaorg/celestia-app: x/qgb/README.md

# Quantum gravity bridge state machine

This module contains the [Quantum gravity bridge](https://blog.celestia.org/celestiums/) state machine implementation.

## State machine

The QGB state machine handles the creation of the attestations requests:

> https://github.com/celestiaorg/celestia-app/blob/801a0d412631989ce97748badbd7bb676982db16/x/qgb/types/attestation.go#L15-L23

Author: [Question for reviewers]
Currently, markdown linter complains about bare URLs:
```
MD034/no-bare-urls Bare URL used [Context: "https://github.com/celestiaorg..."]
```
However, I guess in the case where we're providing snippets links, it should be okay. Since, using links to code makes it easier to scroll, syntax highlighting and navigation.

Do you think we should remove the rule? or I switch to copy-paste?

Reviewer: I think we should keep the linter rule and provide a link name like so:

```markdown
The QGB state machine handles the creation of [`AttestationRequestI`](https://github.com/celestiaorg/celestia-app/blob/801a0d412631989ce97748badbd7bb676982db16/x/qgb/types/attestation.go#L15-L23) which can be a [`DataCommitment`](https://github.com/celestiaorg/celestia-app/blob/801a0d412631989ce97748badbd7bb676982db16/proto/qgb/types.proto#L31-L47) or [`Valset`](https://github.com/celestiaorg/celestia-app/blob/801a0d412631989ce97748badbd7bb676982db16/proto/qgb/types.proto#L17-L29).
```

Author: [7f28cb9](https://github.com/celestiaorg/celestia-app/pull/1052/commits/7f28cb9584fe4cd7eba0eaf2dc9f4b75757c87f0)

> # Quantum gravity bridge state machine

Reviewer: [no change needed][discussion] since this README contains docs for a Cosmos SDK module, thoughts on conforming to the structure of https://github.com/cosmos/cosmos-sdk/tree/main/x/auth. For this line:

```suggestion
# `x/qgb`
```

if we do adopt the Cosmos SDK module docs structure, we may also adopt the headings from https://github.com/cosmos/cosmos-sdk/tree/main/x/auth for other sections

> This module contains the [Quantum gravity bridge](https://blog.celestia.org/celestiums/) state machine implementation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Abstract
This module contains the [Quantum Gravity Bridge](https://blog.celestia.org/celestiums/) (QGB) state machine implementation.
```

}
```

#### Valset panics

Similar to data commitments, when checking if the state machine needs to generate a new valset, it might panic in the following cases:

- When checking that a previous valset has been emitted, but it is unable to get it:

```golang
if k.CheckLatestAttestationNonce(ctx) && k.GetLatestAttestationNonce(ctx) != 0 {  
   var err error  
   latestValset, err = k.GetLatestValset(ctx)  
   if err != nil {  
      panic(err)  
   }  
}
```

- When getting the current valset:

```golang
vs, err := k.GetCurrentValset(ctx)
if err != nil {  
   // this condition should only occur in the simulator  
   // ref : https://github.com/Gravity-Bridge/Gravity-Bridge/issues/35 
   if errors.Is(err, types.ErrNoValidators) {  
      ctx.Logger().Error("no bonded validators",  
         "cause", err.Error(),  
      )  
      return  
   }  
   panic(err)  
}
```

- When creating the internal validator struct, i.e. mapping the validators EVM addresses to their powers:

```golang
intLatestMembers, err := types.BridgeValidators(latestValset.Members).ToInternal()  
if err != nil {  
   panic(sdkerrors.Wrap(err, "invalid latest valset members"))  
}
```

#### Attestations panics

> When storing a new attestation, which is either a data commitment or a valset, the state machine can panic for in the following cases:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When storing a new attestation, which is either a data commitment or a valset, the state machine can panic in the following cases:
```

- The attestation request created from the data commitment is a duplicate of an existing attestation:

```golang
key := []byte(types.GetAttestationKey(nonce))  
store := ctx.KVStore(k.storeKey)  
  
if store.Has(key) {  
   panic("trying to overwrite existing attestation request")  
}
```

- An error happened while marshalling the interface:

```golang
b, err := k.cdc.MarshalInterface(at)  
if err != nil {  
   panic(err)  
}
```

- The universal nonce was not incremented correctly by 1:

```golang
if k.CheckLatestAttestationNonce(ctx) && k.GetLatestAttestationNonce(ctx)+1 != nonce {  
   panic("not incrementing latest attestation nonce correctly")  
}
```

## Useful links

The smart contract implementation is in [quantum-gravity-bridge](https://github.com/celestiaorg/quantum-gravity-bridge/).

The orchestrator and relayer implementations are in [orchestrator-relayer](https://github.com/celestiaorg/orchestrator-relayer/).

> QGB v1 implementation, including the orchestrator and relayer, is in the [qgb-integration](https://github.com/celestiaorg/celestia-app/tree/qgb-integration) branch.

Reviewer: 👍

- No valset exist in store, so a new valset will be created. This happens mostly after genesis, or after a hard fork.
- The current block height is the last unbonding height, i.e. when a validator is leaving the validator set. A new valset will need to be created to accommodate that change.
- A significant power difference happened since the last valset. This could happen if a validator has way more staking power or the opposite. The significant power difference threshold is defined by the constant `SignificantPowerDifferenceThreshold`, and is set to 5% currently.

#### New data commitment creation

A new data commitment is created in the following situation:

https://github.com/celestiaorg/celestia-app/blob/801a0d412631989ce97748badbd7bb676982db16/x/qgb/abci.go#L23

I.e. the current block height is not 0, and we're at a data commitment window height.

The data commitment window is defined as a governance parameter that can be changed. Currently, it is set to 400.

### Panics

During EndBlock step, the state machine generates new attestations if needed. During this generation, the state machine could panic.

#### Data commitment panics

> During EndBlock, if the block height corresponds to a `DataCommitmentWindow`, it will generate a new data commitment, during which, the state machine can panic in the following case:

Reviewer 2: [nit]
same as comment below

Author: [13e6376](https://github.com/celestiaorg/celestia-app/pull/1052/commits/13e6376199508e32ec8c5524c7d96869b69a028e)

- An unexpected behavior happened while getting the current data commitment:

```golang
dataCommitment, err := k.GetCurrentDataCommitment(ctx)  
if err != nil {  
   panic(sdkerrors.Wrap(err, "coudln't get current data commitment"))  
}
```

#### Valset panics

> Similar to data commitments, when checking if the state machine needs to generate a new valset, it might panic in the following cases:

Reviewer 2: Might want to clarify a bit that it only panics when invalid state is created

- When checking that a previous valset has been emitted, but it is unable to get it:

```golang
if k.CheckLatestAttestationNonce(ctx) && k.GetLatestAttestationNonce(ctx) != 0 {  
   var err error  
   latestValset, err = k.GetLatestValset(ctx)  
   if err != nil {  
      panic(err)  
   }  
}
```

- When getting the current valset:

```golang
vs, err := k.GetCurrentValset(ctx)
if err != nil {  
   // this condition should only occur in the simulator  
   // ref : https://github.com/Gravity-Bridge/Gravity-Bridge/issues/35 
   if errors.Is(err, types.ErrNoValidators) {  
      ctx.Logger().Error("no bonded validators",  
         "cause", err.Error(),  
      )  
      return  
   }  
   panic(err)  
}
```

- When creating the internal validator struct, i.e. mapping the validators EVM addresses to their powers:

```golang
intLatestMembers, err := types.BridgeValidators(latestValset.Members).ToInternal()  
if err != nil {  
   panic(sdkerrors.Wrap(err, "invalid latest valset members"))  
}
```

#### Attestations panics

> When storing a new attestation, which is either a data commitment or a valset, the state machine can panic in the following cases:

Reviewer 2: [nit]
same as below

Author: [13e6376](https://github.com/celestiaorg/celestia-app/pull/1052/commits/13e6376199508e32ec8c5524c7d96869b69a028e)

- The attestation request created from the data commitment is a duplicate of an existing attestation:

```golang
key := []byte(types.GetAttestationKey(nonce))  
store := ctx.KVStore(k.storeKey)  
  
if store.Has(key) {  
   panic("trying to overwrite existing attestation request")  
}
```

- An error happened while marshalling the interface:

```golang
b, err := k.cdc.MarshalInterface(at)  
if err != nil {  
   panic(err)  
}
```

- The universal nonce was not incremented correctly by 1:

```golang
if k.CheckLatestAttestationNonce(ctx) && k.GetLatestAttestationNonce(ctx)+1 != nonce {  
   panic("not incrementing latest attestation nonce correctly")  
}
```

> ## Useful links

Reviewer 2: could make link the ADRs

Author: [13e6376](https://github.com/celestiaorg/celestia-app/pull/1052/commits/13e6376199508e32ec8c5524c7d96869b69a028e)

    ...
}
```

- No valset exists in store, so a new valset will be created. This happens mostly after genesis, or after a hard fork.
- The current block height is the last unbonding height, i.e. when a validator is leaving the validator set. A new valset will need to be created to accommodate that change.
- A significant power difference happened since the last valset. This could happen if a validator has way more staking power or the opposite. The significant power difference threshold is defined by the constant `SignificantPowerDifferenceThreshold`, and is set to 5% currently.

#### New data commitment creation

A new data commitment is created in the following situation:

```golang
if ctx.BlockHeight() != 0 && ctx.BlockHeight()%int64(k.GetDataCommitmentWindowParam(ctx)) == 0 {
	...
}
```

I.e. the current block height is not 0, and we're at a data commitment window height.

The data commitment window is defined as a governance parameter that can be changed. Currently, it is set to 400.

### Panics

During EndBlock step, the state machine generates new attestations if needed. During this generation, the state machine could panic.

#### Data commitment panics

> During EndBlock, if the block height corresponds to a `DataCommitmentWindow`, it will generate a new data commitment, during which, the state machine can panic, if it finds invalid state, in the following case:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
During EndBlock, if the block height corresponds to a `DataCommitmentWindow`, it will generate a new data commitment. Note that the state machine can panic if invalid state is introduced.
```

I would also then either remove
`- An unexpected behavior happened while getting the current data commitment:`
or clarify with more precise details of what could cause that. Like if the last nonce's key is missing or something not sure. Also, if we only have a single entry, I'm not sure we need a list

Author: I'll remove the data commitment panic section because currently, the `GetDataCommitment` will never return an error => no panics.

- An unexpected behavior happened while getting the current data commitment:

```golang
dataCommitment
}, err := k.GetCurrentDataCommitment(ctx)  
if err != nil {  
   panic(sdkerrors.Wrap(err, "coudln't get current data commitment"))  
}
```

#### Valset panics

> Similar to data commitments, when checking if the state machine needs to generate a new valset, it might panic, if it finds invalid state, in the following cases:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Note that, similar to data commitments, the state machine can panic if the required valset is not stored in the state db.
```

Author: doesn't it make sense to keep the list? we have three cases where the state machine can panic...

> - When checking that a previous valset has been emitted, but it is unable to get it:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

Reviewer 2: might also need to do some formatting if the above change is adopted

```golang
if k.CheckLatestAttestationNonce(ctx) && k.GetLatestAttestationNonce(ctx) != 0 {  
   var err error  
   latestValset, err = k.GetLatestValset(ctx)  
   if err != nil {  
      panic(err)  
   }  
}
```

- When getting the current valset:

```golang
vs, err := k.GetCurrentValset(ctx)
if err != nil {  
   // this condition should only occur in the simulator  
   // ref : https://github.com/Gravity-Bridge/Gravity-Bridge/issues/35 
   if errors.Is(err, types.ErrNoValidators) {  
      ctx.Logger().Error("no bonded validators",  
         "cause", err.Error(),  
      )  
      return  
   }  
   panic(err)  
}
```

- When creating the internal validator struct, i.e. mapping the validators EVM addresses to their powers:

```golang
intLatestMembers, err := types.BridgeValidators(latestValset.Members).ToInternal()  
if err != nil {  
   panic(sdkerrors.Wrap(err, "invalid latest valset members"))  
}
```

#### Attestations panics

> When storing a new attestation, which is either a data commitment or a valset, the state machine can panic, if it finds invalid state, in the following cases:
> 
> - The attestation request created from the data commitment is a duplicate of an existing attestation:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When storing a new attestation, which is either a data commitment or a valset, the state machine can panic if the attestation request is a duplicate of an existing attestation.
```
